 The /usr merge idea was first raised in "The Case for the /usr Merge" by Lennart Poettering in 2012. It came out of the systemd community, but was not meant to be systemd-specific, though, as the comment thread on that LWN post indicates, the idea was controversial at least in part because of its association with systemd. At its core, it was a straightforward plan to move the files in /bin to /usr/bin, then make a symbolic link so that /bin would resolve to /usr/bin; the same would be done for the other top-level directories of interest (/sbin and /lib*).

The main reason behind the merge was for compatibility with other Unix systems and to make building packages for Linux distributions easier; upstream software, build tools, and the like would no longer have to treat Linux specially. Anything that relied on /bin/foo or /usr/bin/foo would find what they were looking for, but everything would live under /usr. That would permit things like an immutable, distribution-supplied /usr, snapshots of the system state would be simpler, and so on.

Fedora, as is often the case, took the lead and implemented merged /usr, for Fedora 17 in 2012. Other distributions followed suit, with most of the mainstream distributions following the Fedora approach of having a "flag day" switch; new or upgraded versions of the distribution would either install a merged /usr or switch the system to use that as part of an upgrade. Supporting both the old and the new layout simultaneously was not something those distributions chose to do.

Debian took a more incremental approach, in part because it strives not to make wholesale changes to users' systems like those required by a flag-day upgrade to a merged /usr. In 2016, the ability to voluntarily switch to that scheme was added, then some attempts were made for newer versions of the distribution to be installed with a merged /usr by default. In 2018, the Debian build systems were switched to use that layout, but problems cropped up because packages built under a merged /usr would sometimes fail to work on non-merged systems. The location of some files was being resolved at build time to point into /usr/bin (for example), but those files only existed in /bin on the non-merged systems.

The build system changes were reverted, so that both types of systems could be supported. But the problem led Ian Jackson to ask the Debian technical committee (often abbreviated as CTTE or ctte), which is the ultimate arbiter of technical disputes within the project, to override the decision by the debootstrap developers to make merged /usr be the default. Debootstrap is used to create a base system into a directory that can then be used as a chroot environment for building additional packages, though it has other uses as well.

The committee declined to overrule the debootstrap maintainers, but did give a lengthy summary of the cases for and against /usr merge. The committee also used its advisory role to note that the then-under-development Debian 10 ("buster") would support both system types in a "weak" form, but suggested that it was desirable that Debian 11 ("bullseye") move toward a "middle" ground with better support for merged /usr.

Debian, being Debian, discussed the issue multiple times along the way, at varying levels of intensity and rancor. Supporting both types of systems was difficult in various ways, leading some to say that either /usr merge should be made mandatory—or scrapped entirely. At the end of 2020, Ansgar Burchardt asked the technical committee to decide whether Debian 12 ("bookworm") should only support merged /usr systems. At the end of January 2021, the question was put to a vote, and the result was unanimous in favor of doing so:

    The Technical Committee resolves that Debian 'bookworm' should support only the merged-usr root filesystem layout, dropping support for the non-merged-usr layout.

    Until after the release of 'bullseye', any implementation of this resolution must be done in the 'experimental' distribution, or otherwise kept out of the critical paths for the release of 'bullseye'. 

Symlink farms

That would seem to resolve the situation, in favor of a flag day for Debian 12, but, as might be guessed, things did not quite work out that way. During the discussion on the vote, committee member Simon McVittie expressed concern that there were two competing visions of what a merged /usr meant. He wondered: "Should we be more specific than this in what we vote on, to avoid later having to adjudicate between developers who say that a particular implementation is or isn't merged-usr?" That comment would foreshadow the events to come.
